Director's Console — User Guide

  Practical end-to-end workflows. Based on what's actually implemented as of March
  2026.

  ---
  Setup

  Start All Services

  python start.py          # starts Orchestrator (9820), CPE backend (9800),
  frontend (5173)
  python start.py --setup  # first-run: verifies venvs and dependencies

  Open http://localhost:5173 in a browser. You'll see four top-level tabs:
  Storyboard, Gallery, Cinema Prompt Engineering, and Settings.

  First-Run Configuration

  Before generating anything, go to Main Menu (☰) → Settings:

  1. Project path — set this to the folder where all output images will be saved.
  This is the root from which the Orchestrator serves images and where the Gallery
  reads files. Every panel gets its own subfolder here
  ({projectPath}/{panelName}/).
  2. ComfyUI URL — the address of your default ComfyUI node (e.g.,
  http://192.168.1.100:8188). This is where single-node generations go.
  3. Orchestrator URL — http://localhost:9820 if running locally. Required for
  multi-node parallel generation and backend management.

  If you're on a NAS/CIFS mount, go to Main Menu → Path Mappings and configure your
   Windows ↔ Linux ↔ macOS path prefixes. The Orchestrator will automatically
  translate paths in all API calls. Example: W:\VFX\ ↔ /mnt/Mandalore/VFX/.

  ---
  1. CPE Prompt Generation → Storyboard → Generation

  Step 1: Generate a Cinematic Prompt (CPE Tab)

  The Cinema Prompt Engineering tab builds prompts grounded in real-world
  cinematography — it knows which cameras existed in which eras, which lenses they
  used, and which film stocks are physically possible.

  1. Select a Film Preset (e.g., "Blade Runner", "Neon Noir", "Golden Age
  Hollywood"). Each preset locks in era-appropriate camera bodies, lenses, and film
   stocks.
  2. Configure shot composition: choose shot size (ECU → LS), camera angle,
  movement, and lighting setup. Only historically valid combinations are offered.
  3. Enter your scene description in the text field.
  4. Click Generate Prompt to produce the rules-based prompt.
  5. Optionally click Enhance with AI — this sends the generated prompt to your
  configured LLM provider (set up in Settings → LLM Providers) to refine it. The
  enhanced result appears below the original.

  Step 2: Send the Prompt to Storyboard

  This is a two-step process — both clicks are required:

  1. Click 📋 Send to Storyboard (next to either the generated or enhanced prompt).
   This stores the prompt in a shared buffer. No visible confirmation appears —
  this is by design.
  2. Switch to the Storyboard tab. In the right-side parameter panel, find the
  positive prompt field for the active panel. A 🎬 button will appear in that
  field's toolbar. Click it to paste the prompt.

  After pasting, the buffer is cleared. The 🎬 button only appears on the positive
  prompt field (not the negative one) and only when a prompt is waiting.

  Step 3: Generate in the Storyboard

  With a prompt in the panel's positive prompt field:

  1. Ensure the panel has a workflow selected (see Workflow Setup below).
  2. Adjust any parameters in the right panel — steps, CFG, seed, image inputs,
  LoRAs, etc. These are per-panel; each panel stores its own values independently.
  3. Click Generate. Progress appears in the Generation Progress sidebar (right
  side), showing the current ComfyUI node being executed, phase (for multi-KSampler
   workflows), and step count.
  4. The result appears in the panel when done and is auto-saved to
  {projectPath}/{panelName}/.

  The Cancel button (red, next to Generate) sends an interrupt to all currently
  busy nodes immediately.

  ---
  2. Workflow Setup and Parameter Exposure

  Importing a Workflow

  Workflows are ComfyUI workflow JSON files that you export from ComfyUI and import
   into Director's Console.

  1. In the Storyboard, click Main Menu → Import Workflow (or use the workflow
  dropdown → import icon).
  2. Select a ComfyUI workflow JSON. The frontend parses the nodes and extracts all
   configurable parameters.
  3. Give the workflow a name and assign it to a category tab: Text to Image, Image
   to Image, Inpainting, Image Editing, Upscaling, or Video Generation.

  The workflow dropdown at the top of the Storyboard is filtered by whichever
  category tab is active. If you import a workflow and can't find it, check that
  you're on the matching tab.

  How Parameters Are Exposed

  Director's Console reads the workflow JSON and auto-detects exposable parameters:

  - KSampler inputs: steps, CFG, sampler, scheduler, seed
  - Text nodes (CLIPTextEncode): exposed as prompt widgets with the CPE paste
  button and camera angle selector
  - Image inputs (LoadImage, etc.): exposed as drag-drop zones with crop/mask tools
  - LoRA loaders: exposed as dropdowns with strength sliders
  - Model nodes (CheckpointLoader, UNETLoader): exposed as model selectors
  - Custom nodes: any node with recognizable parameter types gets exposed

  Parameters you don't want exposed can be left as fixed values inside ComfyUI
  before exporting.

  Per-Panel Parameter Isolation

  Each canvas panel stores its own parameter values independently. The active
  (selected) panel uses the live values shown in the right-side parameter panel.
  All other panels use their own stored copies. When you switch which panel is
  selected, the right-side panel reloads that panel's stored values.

  When switching workflows on a panel, only the positive prompt and image inputs
  are preserved — everything else (steps, CFG, sampler) resets to the new
  workflow's defaults.

  ---
  3. Multi-Node Parallel Generation

  Multi-node parallel generation runs the same workflow simultaneously across
  multiple ComfyUI backends, each with a different random seed, giving you N
  results at once.

  Prerequisites

  1. The Orchestrator must be running (http://localhost:9820).
  2. The Orchestrator URL must be configured in Storyboard Settings.
  3. Multiple ComfyUI nodes must be registered in the Orchestrator (configured in
  the Orchestrator's own config or auto-discovered).

  Setting Up Nodes

  Open Main Menu → Node Manager. This shows all render nodes the Orchestrator knows
   about — their status (online/offline/busy), GPU name, VRAM total/used, GPU
  utilization %, temperature, CPU %, and RAM. Nodes are populated from the
  Orchestrator's /api/backends endpoint on connect.

  Node stats update in real-time via WebSocket (KayTool metrics if the KayTool
  ComfyUI extension is installed on the node; otherwise from /system_stats).

  Running Parallel Generation

  1. In the Storyboard, open the node selector (multi-node icon, toolbar above the
  canvas). Select two or more online nodes using the checkboxes.
  2. Configure the panel's workflow and parameters normally.
  3. Click Generate. The frontend submits the workflow to the Orchestrator as a job
   group (POST /api/job-group with the workflow JSON and list of backend IDs). The
  Orchestrator assigns a unique random seed to each backend.
  4. A ParallelResultsView overlay appears, showing a card for each backend. Each
  card updates in real-time as the job progresses (0–100%).
  5. As each node completes, its result image is saved to the panel's image history
   immediately — you don't wait for all nodes to finish.
  6. The panel's Generation Progress sidebar shows individual progress bars per
  node.
  7. When all jobs complete (or the first failure occurs), a summary is logged.
  Close the overlay with its X button.

  Important: The Orchestrator handles path remapping for cross-platform NAS setups.
   Per-node OS-specific path normalization (Windows backslashes vs forward slashes)
   is not applied in parallel mode — all nodes must share the same path format, or
  use the Path Mappings configuration.

  Cancelling Parallel Jobs

  Click the Cancel button. This sends an interrupt to all currently busy nodes
  directly via their ComfyUI /interrupt endpoint.

  ---
  4. The Gallery

  The Gallery tab is a full media browser for everything inside your project path.

  Navigation

  The left panel shows a folder tree of your project. Click any folder to load its
  contents. The Gallery never modifies files it hasn't been explicitly told to —
  browsing is read-only.

  Views

  - Grid: thumbnails with hover preview
  - List: filename, size, date columns
  - Masonry: Pinterest-style variable-height layout with tight 4px gaps, no chrome
  - Timeline: chronological grouping by date

  Metadata and Organization

  - Ratings: click the star on any image to rate 1–5. Ratings are stored in
  {projectPath}/.gallery/gallery.json, not in the file itself.
  - Tags: create color-coded tags (Main Menu → Tag Manager) and apply them to files
   via right-click.
  - PNG metadata search: search across all PNG files by their embedded metadata —
  workflow name, parameters, seeds, model names.
  - Duplicate finder: compares files by hash across the project.

  Batch Operations

  Select multiple files with Ctrl+Click or Shift+Click, then use the batch bar:
  - Batch rename: template-based ({panel}_{date}_{index}), regex, or sequential
  auto-numbering.
  - Move: move selected files to another folder.
  - Trash: soft-delete to .gallery/.trash/. Restore via Trash panel.

  When you rename files in the Gallery, the Storyboard is notified automatically
  and updates its panel image history URLs so existing panels don't show broken
  images.

  Gallery → Storyboard Integration

  Right-click any image in the Gallery for context menu options:

  - Send to Storyboard: sends the image as a reference input to a parameter in the
  active Storyboard panel. A submenu lists the available image input parameters for
   the currently loaded workflow.
  - Restore workflow from metadata: if the PNG has embedded generation metadata,
  this restores the full workflow and parameters in the Storyboard so you can
  re-run or modify the exact generation.

  These work via browser window CustomEvents — both tabs must be open in the same
  browser window for them to communicate.

  ---
  5. Gotchas and Non-Obvious Steps

  The workflow tab filter is strict. If you switch to the "Video Generation" tab
  and your workflows have no video category assigned, the dropdown shows empty.
  This doesn't mean your workflows are gone — switch back to the correct tab or
  reassign the category in the workflow editor.

  Loading a project doesn't auto-switch the workflow tab. If your project was saved
   with a video workflow while you were on the video tab, but you later switch to
  the text2img tab and then load the project, the workflow dropdown will appear
  blank (the workflow ID is restored internally, but getFilteredWorkflows() only
  shows workflows matching the current tab). Work around this by manually switching
   to the matching tab after loading a project.

  The CPE "Send to Storyboard" button requires a second click in the Storyboard.
  After clicking it in the CPE tab, switch to Storyboard and look for the 🎬 button
   in the positive prompt field. The buffer persists until you click it or refresh
  the page.

  Panels are independent; the selected panel is special. Only the selected panel
  uses the live parameter values shown on the right. If you generate on an
  unselected panel, it uses that panel's stored parameters, which may be different
  from what you see. Click a panel to select it before changing parameters intended
   for it.

  Image deletion requires the CPE backend proxy. The browser can't DELETE files
  directly from ComfyUI due to CORS. The delete button routes through
  http://localhost:9800/api/delete-file. If the CPE backend isn't running, image
  deletion will silently fail.

  Parallel generation requires the Orchestrator running. If you select multiple
  nodes and click Generate but don't have the Orchestrator URL configured, you'll
  get an error message and generation won't start. Single-node generation goes
  direct to ComfyUI and doesn't need the Orchestrator.

  Downstream node cascading on disabled inputs. If you disable an image input
  (e.g., uncheck a ControlNet image), all nodes downstream of it in the workflow
  graph are automatically bypassed. This prevents ComfyUI errors from missing
  inputs. The cascade is computed from the workflow JSON graph at generation time.

  ---
  Recent Changes (March 2026)

  C1 — Orchestrator job submission fixed. Single-job submissions via the
  Orchestrator (POST /api/job) now correctly send the workflow as workflow_json
  (not workflow) and place source/client_id inside a metadata object, matching the
  Orchestrator's JobSubmissionRequest model. Before this fix, single-job
  orchestrated submissions always failed silently.

  C2 — Parallel generation now routes through Orchestrator job groups. Previously,
  parallel generation bypassed the Orchestrator entirely — the frontend submitted a
   separate /prompt request directly to each ComfyUI node and tracked each one with
   its own WebSocket. This was replaced: the frontend now submits a single POST
  /api/job-group to the Orchestrator, which handles distribution and seed
  assignment. Real-time progress comes via a single WebSocket at
  /ws/job-groups/{id}. The new ParallelResultsView overlay shows streaming results
  as each node completes. Results are saved to panel history as they arrive (not
  batch at the end).

  M3 — Node restart now routes through the Orchestrator. The "Restart" button in
  Node Manager previously tried to call ComfyUI's /interrupt and /free endpoints
  directly, which required the frontend to know ComfyUI node credentials and
  bypassed the Orchestrator's job awareness. It now calls POST
  /api/backends/{id}/restart on the Orchestrator, which handles the restart safely
  (with optional job interrupt and memory free options).

  M1 — Debug signal removed. A block of code in the project manager that triggered
  an alert on every project save when a debug string appeared in server responses
  has been removed.